Stack Overflow Example Demonstrating Parameter Injection
========================================================

This program has a stack overflow vulnerability in it. Can you find it? Can
you think of a way to exploit this to your advantage?

The accompanying python script `replace_param.py` allows to easily create an
attack payload. But you still need to pass the correct stack address to it for
the attack to work. For simplicity the program outputs the address of the
stack variable in question.

Prerequisites
-------------

For the exploit to work you will need to disable a protection mechanism known
as "address space randomization". Running `make shell` will open a new shell
with the necessary adjustments for the exploit to work as expected.

Exercises
---------

- Look at the content of the exploit buffer generated by the python script and
  understand its structure. Note: Due to x86 processors using "little-endian"
  byte order, the exploit buffer will seem to have addresses in reverse, when
  looking at it e.g. with `xxd`. `xxd` has options to make this easier on the
  eyes: `xxd -e -g8` displays groups of 8 bytes (a single word on AMD64) in
  the "correct" order.
- Single step in `gdb` and watch the overflow change the stack parameters
  which will cause the change in behaviour of the program.

Notes
-----

- Even when running in the specially prepared shell provided by the `make
  shell` target, the address of the stack buffer will change slightly when run
  from different environments like from the python script `replace_param.py`, or
  from `gdb`. Pay attention to the address printed out by the program to make
  sure you have the right one for the environment you're running it in.
